Adding documentation for economic viability methods (#233)
quintel/documentation: docs/main/economic-viability.md

---
title: Economic viability of power plants
---

This section explains the economic viability of power plants, as presented in the following tables:
- **Economic viability of electricity production technologies**
- **Economic viability of electricity storage technologies**
- **Economic viability of flexible electricity demand technologies**

> As described in the [Cost methods](cost-methods.md), the ETM separates fuel costs from OPEX and CAPEX for each cost group. To accurately assess the economic viability of power production facilities, fuel costs must be included in the calculations.

Reviewer: Yes, it is true that fuel costs must be included. I would however rather say that the 'normal' cost method use a systems approach, meaning that fuel and emissions costs are accounted on a system-level and in their own category. These tables use the assets approach.

   ![](/img/docs/costs_equation_opex.png)

   This value is then divided by the MWh of the output carrier.

3. **Revenue (€/MWh)**  
   For technologies with electricity as an output, revenue is based on the hourly electricity market calculations in the ETM. For each hour, revenue is calculated by multiplying the electricity output by the electricity price, then dividing by the total electricity production. Revenue is not attributed to heat production due to limited information on heat value in the model. For flexible technologies with other output carriers (such as power-to-hydrogen and synthetic kerosene production), the user-defined scenario price is used to calculate revenue.

4. **Economic viability (€/MWh)**  
   Economic viability is calculated by subtracting OPEX and CAPEX from revenue, as shown below:

>    ![](/img/docs/Economic_viability_equation.png)

Reviewer: The size of this equation is much larger than that of the other equation.

## Special technology cases

Some technology categories have more complex cost and revenue structures:

> 1. **CHPs**  

Reviewer: It would be good to link to the waste output docs here: https://docs.energytransitionmodel.com/contrib/waste-outputs.

>    CHps are a special case since they produce both electricity and heat. Since there is no value attributed for heat production, only the revenue that is by electricity production is taken into account for CHPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CHPs are a special case because they produce both electricity and heat. However, only the revenue from electricity production is considered, as no value is assigned to the heat they generate.
```

> 2. **Flexible synthetic kerosene production**  

Reviewer: It would be good to link to the dispatchable kerosene production under "Electricity conversion" here.

   Synthetic kerosene production uses both electricity and hydrogen as input carriers. Therefore, fuel cost calculations are based on the input of both carriers.

> 3. **Battery parks & offshore hybrid wind parks**  

Reviewer: It would be good to link to the always on producers here: https://docs.energytransitionmodel.com/contrib/always-on-battery-parks/

   These plants consist of multiple components. As a result, it is difficult to determine the economic viability of one of the components in the plant. 
   For this reason, these have been left out of the tables.

> 4. **Battery electric vehicles**  

Reviewer: It would be good to link to the costs per sector docs here: https://docs.energytransitionmodel.com/main/cost-overview-per-sector#transport

>    The costs associated with Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) are not solely related to their role in the energy system, as their primary function is transportation. For this reason, the CAPEX and economic viability columns are excluded from the table. However, the table does include the other relevant columns: the average cost of electricity used for charging (OPEX) and the average profit from electricity discharged back to the grid (Revenue). These can be used to assess the business case of BEV's in the scenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The costs associated with Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) are not solely related to their role in the energy system, as their primary function is transportation. For this reason, the BEV CAPEX and economic viability columns are excluded from the Economic Viability table. However, the table does include the other relevant columns: the average cost of electricity used for charging (OPEX) and the average profit from electricity discharged back to the grid (Revenue). These can be used to assess the business case of BEV's in a scenario.
```
